Reactive programming (#11)
surma/dassur.ma: content/things/streams-for-reactive-programming.md

```js
import { fromIterable, subscribe } from "observables-with-streams";

const owsObservable = fromIterable([1, 2, 3]);
const [o1, o2] = owsObservable.tee();
o1.pipeTo(subscribe(v => console.log(`Subscriber 1: ${v}`)));
o2.pipeTo(subscribe(v => console.log(`Subscriber 2: ${v}`)));
```

A beneficial aspects of a pull model is the sinks’ natural ability to “communicate” with a source. Whenever it pulls from the source, it can pass along some auxilliary data, e.g. to signal “back pressure”. The source could then react to this signal by, for example, stopping to generate more data until the sink has worked through the backlog. Streams support backpressure which is important for efficient network communication.

> **Observables on the other hand implement a pull model.** You register a callback (or observer) with an observable which will be invoked _by the observable_. It _pushes_ the value to you. **Observables can have multiple subscribers**, as opposed to the single-subscriber nature of the pull model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Observables on the other hand implement a push model.** You register a callback (or observer) with an observable which will be invoked _by the observable_. It _pushes_ the value to you. **Observables can have multiple subscribers**, as opposed to the single-subscriber nature of the pull model.
```

Author: lol

When you take a picture with your camera, the camera needs to focus on a subject. The “focus point”, the point in space that the camera is focusing on, is often shown on the screen of your camera. But not only that specific point is in focus. Subjects closer to the camera (and subjects further away) can also appear sharp on the picture that you take, depending on _how much_ they are deviating from the focus point. The region that subjects can move around in and still remain in focus is called the “Depth of Field”, or DoF for short. Its size depends on a number of things: Focal length and aperture of the lens, subject distance and sensor size of the camera to begin with. There a number of apps out there that calculate the DoF for you based on these variables, but some have a disappointing UX or only expose a subset of the data I am interested in.

<figure>
  <video src="emitChunk(/things/streams-for-reactive-programming/dof-tool.mp4)" poster="emitChunk(/things/streams-for-reactive-programming/dof-tool-poster.jpg)" muted loop controls></video>
  <figcaption>DoF Tool uses ows to process user input</figcaption>
</figure>

> As any self-respecting web developer who technically had other, more pressing responsibilities, I procrastinated by writing my own app. The tool that came out of this effort is called [DoF Tool]. Another uninspiring name. DoF Tool is [open source][dof source] and makes use of [observables-with-streams][ows] for all of the UI and user interactions. ows is highly tree-shakable, so it should be used with a bundler. For DoF Tool I’m using [Rollup]. However, if you just want to take ows for a quick spin to try it out, you can include it from a CDN like [JSDelivr] as one big bundle:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As any self-respecting web developer who technically had other, more pressing responsibilities, I procrastinated by writing my own app. The tool that came out of this effort is called [DoF Tool]. Another uninspired name. DoF Tool is [open source][dof source] and makes use of [observables-with-streams][ows] for all of the UI and user interactions. The ows module is highly tree-shakable, so it should be used with a bundler. For DoF Tool I’m using [Rollup]. However, if you just want to take ows for a quick spin to try it out, you can include it from a CDN like [JSDelivr] as one big bundle:
```

        return ows.fromInput(slider);
      })
      .pipeThrough(ows.concatAll())
    // ... other inputs
  )
  .pipeThrough(ows.map(calculateFocalPlanes))
  .pipeThrough(ows.map(calculateFieldOfView))
  .pipeThrough(ows.forEach(adjustDOM))
  // Only store changes in idb every second
  .pipeThrough(ows.debounce(1000))
  .pipeThrough(ows.forEach(storeValuesInIDB))
  .pipeTo(ows.discard());
```

I create a couple of observables asynchronously so I can load the last values the user had from IndexedDB. Once they are initialized, I combine all my input data with `combineLatest`, `map` it through the function that do all the required math and finally use `forEach` to plug the resulting numbers back into the DOM. I also store the settings in IndexedDB, only every second or so.

I have to say: I enjoyed writing an app this way. And ows held up so well that I think the experiment is a success. I didn’t encounter any problems related to the differences outlined above. Now, I know that this is not a very complex app so this verdict might not hold up at scale. YMMV. I’d love to hear from some more experienced reactive programmers what they think.

### Performance

> Maybe somewhat surprisingly, I did not do any benchmarks. While I think there’s a good chance that RxJS will perform better in a benchmarking scenario, I have grown skeptical of the relevance of those kinds of benchmarks. The app performs well on a wide spectrum of devices (including the Nokia 2!), and that’s all that matters to me in the end. I was also more interested in comparing capabilities and developer experience first before jumping straight into the performance rabbit hole.

Reviewer: I had expected you to mention the potential diffocult-to-measure upside of ows being inherently async and thus allowing browser scheduling to control flow rate.

Author: It’s microtasks, not tasks, so they still kinda block rendering. I was worried about overselling it.
